docs: ADRs for modeling containers capability (#251)
openedx/openedx-learning: docs/decisions/0017-generalized-containers.rst

============================

This section defines the various lists of container's versions (author-defined, initial, and frozen) used  to track the history of changes made to a container, allowing to view past versions and changes over time.

- Each container version holds different lists of members (author-defined, initial, and frozen) to support rollback operations and history tracking for the container.
- The author-defined list is the list of members that the author has defined for the version of the container.
- The author-defined list won't change for a specific container version even if its references get soft-deleted.
- The initial list is a copy of the author-defined list that has all versions pinned as they were at the time the container version was created.
- The initial list is immutable for a container version.
- The frozen list refers to the list of members at the time when the next version of the container is created.
- The author-defined list is used to show the content of a container version as the author specified it, the frozen list can be used for discard operations on a draft version and the initial-list is part of the history of evolution of the container.

> Let's say a course author creates a unit with three components, all using floating versions. Each component's latest version is V1. The author-defined list would include these three components, ordered as the author decided. The initial list would have the components pinned to V1, while the frozen list would be empty until we create the next version for the container.

Author: ```suggestion
Let's say a course author creates a unit version with three components, all using floating versions. Each component's latest version is V1. The author-defined list would include these three components, ordered as the author decided. The initial list would have the components pinned to V1 since that's the components' versions for this moment in time, while the frozen list would be empty until we create the next version for the unit.
```

Now, when the author creates a new version of the unit, for example, V2, we need to store the latest state of the container in the frozen list. This means pinning the latest versions of the components at that time, let's say V1, V2, and V3, respectively.

> Next, imagine the course author creates a new unit but uses pinned references for the components instead of floating versions, as they don't want to use the latest updates. In this case, the author-defined list, initial list, and frozen list would all be the same, as the component versions remain fixed. If we were to use different pinned versions, then a new unit version would be created instead.

Author: ```suggestion
Next, imagine the course author creates a another unit version but uses pinned references for the components instead of floating versions, as they don't want to use the latest updates. In this case, the author-defined list, initial list, and frozen list would all be the same, as the component versions remain fixed. If we were to use different pinned versions, then a new unit version would be created instead.
```

5. Next Container Versions
==================================

This section defines the rules for version control in containers, explaining when new versions are created based on changes to container structure or metadata.

> - A new version is created if and only if the container itself changes (e.g., title, ordering of members, adding or removing members) and not when its members change (e.g., a component in a Unit is updated with new text). For instance, a new version of a unit is created when a component is removed, not when a new version of a component is created.

Author: Does unpinning a version from a container merit creating a new version for the container? Or is this an entirely different container?

- Containers are not affected by the publishing process of its members. This means that publishing a component won't trigger new publishing processes for a container.

7. Pruning
==========

This section defines the rules for pruning container versions, explaining when a container version can be pruned and the effects of pruning on the container and its members.

- A container version can be pruned if:
  #. It's not being used by any other container.
  #. It's not a published version.
  #. It's not the latest version of the container.
- In a top-down approach, start the deletion process with the parent container and work your way down to its members. E.g., when pruning Section V2 > Subsection V1 > Unit V3, the deletion process starts in the greater container working its way down to the smaller.

> - Pruning a container version will not affect the container's history or the members of other container versions, so containers will not be deleted if they are shared by other containers.

Author: This is my first approach to pruning, based on https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/issues/240#issuecomment-2403407812 and #154. But I still need some clarification about the implication of removing an entity version that's pinned somewhere. When doing so, all versions referencing that version would have to go, too since they'd be invalidated. Is that a correct assumption?

- Each container holds different states of its members (author-defined, initial, and frozen final state) to support rollback operations.
- Members can be added or removed from a container, and the container will maintain the state of the content for the previous version.
- Containers support both fixed and version-agnostic references for members, allowing members to be pinned to a specific version or set to reference the latest draft or published state.
- The latest draft or published states can be referenced by setting the version to ``None``, avoiding the need for new instances on each update.
- A single member (publishable entity) can be referenced by multiple containers, allowing for reuse of content across different containers.

4. Version Control
==================================

- A new version is created if and only if the container itself changes (e.g., title, ordering of contents, adding or removing content) and not when its content changes (e.g., a component in a Unit is updated with new text).
- When a new version is created because a member is added or removed, new references to the members are created to maintain the state of the content for the previous version.

> - Changes to the order of members within a container require creating a new version with the new ordering.

Author: ```suggestion
- Changes to the order of members within a container require creating a new version of the container with the new ordering.
```

> - Changes in pinned published or draft states require creating a new version to maintain the state of the content for the previous version.

Author: ```suggestion
- Changes in pinned published or draft states require creating a new version of the container to maintain the state of the content for the previous version.
```

17. Modeling Containers as a Generalized Capability for Holding Content
========================================================================

Context
-------

> This ADR proposes a model for containers that can hold different types of content, including custom content types, and that can be used to create courses. The model defines the core structure and purpose of containers, the types of containers and content constraints, the members and relationships of containers, version control, publishing, and pruning.

Author: ```suggestion
This ADR proposes a model for containers that can hold different types of content, including custom content types, and that can be used to model other content types with this behavior like units, subsections, sections or courses. The model defines the core structure and purpose of containers, the types of containers and content constraints, the members and relationships of containers, version control, publishing, and pruning.
```

Decisions
---------

1. Core Structure and Purpose of Containers
===========================================

- A container is designed as a generalized capability to hold different types of content.
- A container is a publishable content type that holds other content types through a parent-child relationship.

> - A container application will offer shared definitions for use by other container types.

Author: I think I explained it better in this comment: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/pull/251#discussion_r1842059553. I was referring to a Django application where the APIs and mixins that other container types would be built on.

- Content restrictions for containers are implemented at the app layer, allowing specific container types, like Unit, to limit their members to particular content types (e.g., only Components).
- The course hierarchy Course > Section > Subsection > Unit will be implemented as relationships between containers, with each level acting as a container that holds other content. The hierarchy will be enforced by the content restrictions of each particular container but allowed to be overridden to support `0002-content-flexibility.rst`_.
- Containers will follow extensibility principles in `0003-content-extensibility.rst`_ for creating new container types or subtypes.

3. Container Members and Relationships
=======================================

- The members of a container can be any type of publishable content.
- Members within a container are maintained in a specific order as an ordered list.
- Containers represent their content hierarchy through a structure that defines parent-child relationships between the container and its members.
- The structure defining these relationships is anonymous, so it can only be referenced through the container.

> - Containers can hold both static and dynamically generated content, including user-specific variations.

Reviewer: How will "dynamically generated content" work?

Author: According to #240, dynamically generated content will be built on top of what the issue called "selectors". I thought we could write a different ADR for it. I'm going to create an empty ADR with some basic info at the moment, so it's clear we will address it in this PR.

Author: I removed this from the generalized container capability into the unit ADR, since it makes more sense to be there.

Reviewer: Ah, I see now:

> ```
>     # These entities
>     # could be Selectors, in which case we'd need to do more work to find the right
>     # variant.
> ```

The part that I'm struggling with is that we seem to be using a lot of complexity and work (frozen_list, initial_list) to support both pinned and unpinned versions at this base layer, and I was kind of assuming that by paying the price of that complexity, we would also be able to handle "selectors" and dynamic content. But it seems like that's going to be yet another layer on top of this.

The way that "selectors" will have to deal with pinned/unpinned references and children seems very similar and I am kind of hoping that we'll be able to find some commonality and simplify this. It may be too early to know that though.

> Note that we could implement containers and units first, and add selectors later, but I would like to validate selectors because it's the riskiest part of this design.

I agree with this statement. It's hard to know how good this high level design is until we see how it works with selectors.

Reviewer 2: > The way that "selectors" will have to deal with pinned/unpinned references and children seems very similar and I am kind of hoping that we'll be able to find some commonality and simplify this. It may be too early to know that though.

I think that when I first sketched this part of the data model, my thinking was that we'd want to always pin all the entities referenced from the Variant, because we might be dynamically generating a different Variant per user–something that would make it really expensive to amend things if someone deleted an entity that was referenced in an unpinned way. I also suspect that I sketched the Selector/Variant piece before I started making the distinction between defined/initial/frozen lists, since a lot of that was added to deal with deleting members.

But I agree with your point that there's more overlap here than this model is representing now. Author-defined Variants (like A/B tests) are much more like their own kind of ContainerEntityVersions. Dynamically generated Variants (like randomized subset), could be pointers to those containers + a pinned EntityList.

I feel like all the fundamental pieces are there, if we just nudge things around a bit. I'll chew on it.

Author: > But I agree with your point that there's more overlap here than this model is representing now. Author-defined Variants (like A/B tests) are much more like their own kind of ContainerEntityVersions. Dynamically generated Variants (like randomized subset), could be pointers to those containers + a pinned EntityList.

So, would variants be a container type with special rules (author-defined or per-user) for their author-defined list shown to students?

> - Each container holds different states of its members (user-defined, initial, and frozen final state) to support rollback operations.

Reviewer: I think an expanded description of these three states would be helpful. From this I'm not totally clear on what's the difference between initial and user-defined. And why "initial" is immutable but "frozen" is not (?) even though it sounds like it should be from the name.

Author: For the expanded descriptions, I created a separate section for "Container States," grouping all the state management decisions instead: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/pull/251/commits/af7dce4eb392ffa8967f7c9333ffb80c4f154489. I think now each definition is clear according to what was proposed in the model sketches.

Author: > why "initial" is immutable but "frozen" is not (?) even though it sounds like it should be from the name

I understand frozen lists are "this is how the container looked (a screenshot?) when a new version was created". So, if there's a unit U0 with components `defined_list = P0latest, P1latest, P2latest` all pointing to their latest versions at the time of the next container creation where `frozen_list` would be `None` and `initial_list = P0, P1, P2` where P0, P1, and P2 are the pinned versions of `P0latest `and so on at moment of creation. When U1 is created, `defined_list` looks like `defined_list = P0latest, P1latest, P2latest` so frozen_list would be `frozen_list = P0', P1'', P2'` (the pinned versions of P0latest and so on). New versions for P0,...,1 are created, we'd need a way of knowing what versions were in U1 in case we want to go back to it, so we use frozen lists.

Frozen lists are useful when there are unpinned versions of members, since when they're all pinned, then `defined_list = initial_list = frozen_list`.

IThese in-line comments Dave left in #240 might explain this better: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/pull/254/files#diff-6f2c589dc4ba5960e91d39f6488eb5e2e2e63ddaff63a75909091c760b877802R112-R154

Reviewer: Thanks for expanding the descriptions, but I'm still confused :/

The code seems to call these "lists" not "states" - it would be good to pick a consistent term.

> The user-defined state of a container is the state that the author has defined for the version of the container

I don't think we should call this "user-defined" when it's actually "author-defined." To me, "user-defined" sounds more like "the version of this container that a specific user will see (after we've accounted for groups, A/B testing, randomized content, exam permissions, etc.). But "author-defined" is clear.

> - The initial state of a container is the state of the container when it was first created.

>    `# inital_list is an EntityList where all the versions are pinned, to show`
>    `# what the exact versions of the children were at the time that the`
>    `# Container was created.`

Is initial list really the list when the **container** was first created? (which I assume would usually be an empty list). I _think_ this should say "the initial list is a copy of the author-defined list that has all versions pinned as they were at the time the **ContainerEntityVersion** was created." Because if this is really something immutable from when the _container_ was created, not something for when each _version_ is created, then it should be on the container model, not redundantly specified for every ContainerEntityVersion.

> The frozen final state of a container is the state of the container at the time when a new version is created.

I think this needs an example: "While this ContainerEntityVersion is the current draft, this will be None which means that unpinned entities in the list should be showing their latest version. However, once this is published or an even newer draft is created, this frozen list should be saved to reflect the history of the list at that exact point in time when the version was finalized."

---------

I also don't really understand the need for an `initial_list` at all. Isn't it the same as "the frozen_list of the previous version"? And whether that's the case or not, when/why do we need to use it (initial_list)? I don't see any explanation in https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/issues/240 .

Author: Oh, now I see that in the ADR itself I called it container states in some places and in others lists. I updated this also considering the author-defined suggestion:  https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/pull/251/commits/506d9cdc3a3dc53df3fdd2d33e8acfac95dae550

Author: Oh, now I see that in the ADR itself I called it container states in some places and in others lists. I updated this also considering the author-defined suggestion:  https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/pull/251/commits/506d9cdc3a3dc53df3fdd2d33e8acfac95dae550

Author: > Is initial list really the list when the container was first created? (which I assume would usually be an empty list). 

No. It's when the next container version is created, not the container entity itself. 

> I think this should say "the initial list is a copy of the author-defined list that has all versions pinned as they were at the time the ContainerEntityVersion was created." 

Yes, that's a better description of what's actually happening here. However, I want to keep this as high-level as possible, so I won't mention container entities or other model-specific definitions.

> Because if this is really something immutable from when the container was created, not something for when each version is created, then it should be on the container model, not redundantly specified for every ContainerEntityVersion.

Exactly, these lists are actually related to each container version, not the container entity. I'll make that clear.

Author: Oh, now I see that in the ADR itself I called it container states in some places and in others lists. I updated this also considering the author-defined suggestion. Thanks for the suggestions!

---

> Is initial list really the list when the container was first created? (which I assume would usually be an empty list). 

No. It's when the next container version is created, not the container entity itself. 

> I think this should say "the initial list is a copy of the author-defined list that has all versions pinned as they were at the time the ContainerEntityVersion was created." 

Yes, that's a better description of what's actually happening here. However, I want to keep this as high-level as possible, so I won't mention container entities or other model-specific definitions unless you consider them necessary.

> Because if this is really something immutable from when the container was created, not something for when each version is created, then it should be on the container model, not redundantly specified for every ContainerEntityVersion.

Exactly, these lists are actually related to each container version, not the container entity. I'll make that clear.

---

> I think this needs an example: "While this ContainerEntityVersion is the current draft, this will be None which means that unpinned entities in the list should be showing their latest version. However, once this is published or an even newer draft is created, this frozen list should be saved to reflect the history of the list at that exact point in time when the version was finalized."

In "...unpinned entities in the list should be showing their lates version"  do you refer to the author-defined list, right?

---

> I also don't really understand the need for an initial_list at all. Isn't it the same as "the frozen_list of the previous version"? And whether that's the case or not, when/why do we need to use it (initial_list)? I don't see any explanation in https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/issues/240 .

I think the idea of an initial state came from this comment: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/issues/38#issuecomment-2395589146 -- still, it doesn't say the end purpose. But as far as I understand, it's included for convenience according to: 

    # inital_list is an EntityList where all the versions are pinned, to show
    # what the exact versions of the children were at the time that the
    # Container was created. We could technically derive this, but it would be
    # awkward to query.
    #
    # If the Container was defined so that all references were pinned, then this
    # can point to the exact same EntityList as defined_list.

Reviewer: Yeah, I saw that, but I still don't understand the use case. I also can't tell if it's any different than "the frozen_list of the previous version", or if those are the same thing.

@ormsbee maybe you can clarify?

- Members can be added or removed from a container, and the container will maintain the state of the content for the previous version (frozen final state).

> - The initial state of a container is immutable.

Author: Now, it mentions the initial list of members instead of "state".

- When a container's structure changes, e.g., when a new member is added, the user-defined state of the container is updated with the new members list.
- Containers support both fixed and version-agnostic references for members, allowing members to be pinned to a specific version or set to reference the latest draft or published state.

> - The latest draft or published states can be referenced by setting the version to ``None``, avoiding the need for new instances on each update.

Reviewer: Is there a difference between specifying "latest draft" and specifying "latest published" or is there just a way to say "latest" (version=None), and whether that is draft or published depends on _______ ?

EDIT: OK, from looking at the code it appears that each container (via `EntityListRow`) can specify _both_ a `draft_version` and a `published_version` at the same time, separately. And each can be either pinned or unpinned. I guess I'm very unclear on how this works when the `ContainerEntityVersion` itself is versioned and has a draft + published version.

 If I have a draft `ContainerEntityVersion`, what do its `EntityListRow`s' `published_version`s mean? And when I publish it, so it's now a published `ContainerEntityVersion`, what do its `EntityListRow`s' `draft_version`s mean?

Reviewer 2: > If I have a draft `ContainerEntityVersion`, what do its `EntityListRow`s' `published_version`s mean? And when I publish it, so it's now a published `ContainerEntityVersion`, what do its `EntityListRow`s' `draft_version`s mean?

I originally had it with just `version`, but I vaguely remember thinking that I had to add `draft_version` separately from `published_version` to address some edge case... which I have totally forgotten. And maybe was wrong-headed to begin with. 😛 Let's take it back out for now–if said weird edge case was real, I'm sure we'll run into it in the not-too-distant future, and deal with it then.

Author: @ormsbee: during our latest discussion, you mentioned that having both, mainly the draft version, covered the CCX use cases where we don't necessarily control the latest draft version, so we'd want to pin it for the author's context. Do you think we should cover that case later down the line?

We also discussed that having both would help us know which published/draft versions were in the frozen list when creating the next version, but I think that the use case could be covered by having a single reference to the current version draft or published. Would you agree?

Reviewer 2: > @ormsbee: during our latest discussion, you mentioned that having both, mainly the draft version, covered the CCX use cases where we don't necessarily control the latest draft version, so we'd want to pin it for the author's context. Do you think we should cover that case later on?

I think I was mistaken there, because if the author wanted to pin to a specific version, they could do so, and then when they decided to undo that pin to get something later, they could do so with a new version of the container–no need to keep the publish versioned separate.

> We also discussed that having both would help us know which published/draft versions were in the frozen list when creating the next version, but I think that the use case could be covered by having a single reference to the current version draft or published. Would you agree?

Yeah, I agree.

I think where my head might have been going is what happens in the following scenario:

1. UnitVersion UV1 has an unpinned reference to Component C1.
2. C1 has ComponentVersions CV1 and CV2. CV1 is the current published version, while CV2 is the draft version.
3. C1 is soft-deleted, forcing UV1 to pin down its references to the last version. But does it pin to CV1 or CV2?

-----

So I'm still kicking it around in my head, but I'm trying to see how things line up with Unit/Container modeling if we don't force new container versions to be created when things get deleted, and instead filter out the deleted stuff at read time. I think it could get rid of a lot of the bookkeeping needs for the model. I'm trying to sketch this out this evening to see if it fits together in a reasonable way...

- A single member (publishable entity) can be referenced by multiple containers, allowing for reuse of content across different containers.

4. Version Control
==================================

- A new version is created if and only if the container itself changes (e.g., title, ordering of contents, adding or removing content) and not when its content changes (e.g., a component in a Unit is updated with new text).
- Changes to the order of members within a container require creating a new version of the container with the new ordering.
- Each time a new version is created because of metadata changed, its members are copied from the previous version to preserve the state of the content at that time.

> - Changes in pinned published or draft states require creating a new version of the container to maintain the state of the content for the previous version.

Reviewer: Can you "pin" to a specific draft version or published version? I would assume you can only pin to a specific version number, which isn't really considered "draft" or "published" - it's just a specific version (that may have been the latest published version and/or latest draft version at some point, but may or may not be now).

e.g.

```
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
    ^   ^     ^
    |   |     v8 is draft
    |   v5 is published
    Pinned to v3

In this scenario, v3 is just a specific version, neither published nor draft.
```

Edit: OK, I see now you can pin "draft" and "published" separately for each EntityRow, but I'm confused on the implications of that.

> - Changes in pinned published or draft states require creating a new version of the container to maintain the state of the content for the previous version.
> - Each time a new version is created because of metadata changed, its members are copied from the previous version to preserve the state of the content at that time.
> - When using version-agnostic references to members, no new version is created when members change since the latest draft or published state is always used.

Author: ```suggestion
- Each time a new version is created because of metadata changed, its members are copied from the previous version to preserve the state of the content at that time.
- Changes in pinned published or draft states require creating a new version of the container to maintain the state of the content for the previous version.
- When using version-agnostic references to members, no new version is created when members change since the latest draft or published state is always used.
```

> - When using version-agnostic references, no new version is created when the content changes, and the reference is updated to the latest draft or published state.

Author: ```suggestion
- When using version-agnostic references to members, no new version is created when members change since the latest draft or published state is always used.
```

> - Changes in pinned published or draft states require creating a new version of the container to maintain the state of the content for the previous version.
> - Each time a new version is created because of metadata changed, its members are copied from the previous version to preserve the state of the content at that time.
> - When using version-agnostic references, no new version is created when the content changes, and the reference is updated to the latest draft or published state.

Author: ```suggestion
- Each time a new version is created because of metadata changed, its members are copied from the previous version to preserve the state of the content at that time.
- Changes in pinned published or draft states require creating a new version of the container to maintain the state of the content for the previous version.
- When using version-agnostic references, no new version is created when the content changes, and the reference is updated to the latest draft or published state.
```

- If a member is soft-deleted, the container will create a new version with the member removed.

> 5. Publishing

Author: What I'm still missing here is the behavior of publishing containers when they're being used in a course but they have been modified in some way. I understand we discussed this back in our last meeting, but it's still not clear to me what our approach is.

=============

- Containers can be published, allowing their content to be accessible from where the container is referenced.
- When a draft container is published, all its draft members are also published.
- Members of a container can be published independently of the container itself.

> - If a member of a container is published independently, then it'd be published in the context of the container where it is referenced.

Author: Should these decisions be part of this ADR as well?

- All members within the container should be published before the container can be reused.

- Content restrictions for containers are implemented at the app layer, allowing specific container types, like units, to limit their children to particular content types, e.g., units are restricted to contain only components.
- The course hierarchy Course > Section > Subsection > Unit will be implemented as relationships between containers, with each level acting as a container that holds other content. The hierarchy will be enforced by the content restrictions of each particular container but allowed to be overridden to support `Approach to Content Flexibility <0002-content-flexibility.rst>`_.
- Containers will follow extensibility principles in `Content Extensibility Through Model Relations <0003-content-extensibility.rst>`_ for creating new container types or subtypes.

3. Container Children and Relationships
=======================================

This section defines container children, their order, and relationships, covering flexible connections and support for draft and published states of their children.

- Each container version holds a list of children that the author has defined for that version.

> - The author-defined list is used to show the content of a container version as the author specified it

Author: ```suggestion
- The author-defined list is used to show the content of a container version as the author specified it.
```

- Children within a container are maintained in a specific order as an ordered list. E.g., components within a unit, or units within a subsection, are presented in a specific order.
- Containers represent their content hierarchy through a structure, like Course > Section > Subsection > Unit > Component, which defines parent-child relationships at each level.
- Containers can reference a specific version of their children or be set to point to their latest versions. For instance, component V1 might be used in a unit instead of its latest version. The latest version of a child can be referenced by setting its version to ``None`` which consists of the chosen standard for this representation.
- A single child (publishable entity) can be shared by multiple containers, allowing for reuse of content across different containers. For instance, a component can be shared by multiple units.

4. Next Container Versions
==========================

This section defines the rules for version control in containers, explaining when new versions are created based on changes to container structure or metadata.

> - A new version is created if and only if the container itself changes (e.g., title, ordering of children, adding or removing children) and not when its children change (e.g., a component in a Unit is updated with new text). For instance, a new version of a unit is created when a component is removed, not when a new version of a component is created.

Reviewer: > a new version of a unit is [not created] when a new version of a component is created.

How does this interact with the library workflows?

You have a unit in a library with one component. You publish everything and use it in a course. You edit that component in the library. The unit does not show as changed and can't be published. The component _does_ show as changed, and can be published. When you publish it, you'll see a notification in the course that a newer version of the component is available, and you'll update it directly, not via updating the unit?

Author: I imagine that would happen if we set the unit component to point to the latest version. We wouldn't need to update the unit itself because nothing really changed. Does that make sense?

Reviewer: Yeah, I think I understand this now.

> You have a unit in a library with one component. You publish everything and use it in a course. You edit that component in the library. The unit ~~does not show as changed and can't be published~~ **shows that it _contains_ unpublished changes and you can publish those changes** ~~The component does show as changed, and can be published.~~ When you publish it, you'll see a notification in the course that a newer version of the component is available, and you'll update it directly, not via updating the unit ~~?~~.

> - No external change to a child will trigger the creation of a new version for the container. For example, updating or soft-deleting a component will not trigger the creation of a new version for the unit.

Reviewer: > soft-deleting a component will not trigger the creation of a new version for the unit.

How does a "soft deletion" get published? Is it always applied immediately? Based on the ADR as written, it seems it is impossible to soft delete a child, preview that in the LMS "preview" mode before students see it, then later publish the deletion so that students see it.

Reviewer 2: If a component is soft-deleted today, that means its `draft_version` is set to None. Its `published_version` remains whatever it was before until that soft-delete is published. So you should still be able to look at the draft version of a Unit and see the soft-delete reflected before the publishing of the component happens.

That being said, I think the normal flow of things when we're working in the Studio view of a Unit is that when we delete a component from a Unit, we actually want to create a new version of the Unit to reflect that deletion. Soft-deletion not automatically _triggering_ cascading creations of new containers was a way to try to deal with things that may up in many, many container-like things (e.g. variants of a randomized pool).

Reviewer 2: I also have this vague recollection that it helped to simplify some revert scenarios, but i'm just now getting back into this doc and trying to page all this stuff back into my brain.

Author: > That being said, I think the normal flow of things when we're working in the Studio view of a Unit is that when we delete a component from a Unit, we actually want to create a new version of the Unit to reflect that deletion.

Agree. I _think_ this item refers to what happens when soft-deleting the component itself, but I think that makes describing the workflow a bit more confusing. If that's the case, it also makes sense that a new version is also created when the deletion is published which is not exactly what I said here.

Reviewer: I think there's a lot of ambiguity here, so I'd like to clarify it as three different scenarios:

1. You *remove* a component from a unit, but the component continues to exist. This necessarily creates a new version of the unit.
2. You [soft] delete a component that happens to be used in a unit; you do this from somewhere else in Studio like when viewing that component independently in the library (not in the unit context). Once you publish that deletion, the component will disappear from the learner views of the course. This does not create a new version of the unit (changes don't cascade up).
   -  If you later restore the component "un-delete", it will re-appear in the unit.
   - The Studio UI must indicate somewhere that a deleted component appears as a child, and allow expicitly removing it from the unit (triggering scenario 1), and preventing the un-deletion from affecting the unit in the future. This would be optional and separate. This view that shows a "ghost component" where the component used to be could also provide a button for un-deleting it and/or cloning it and replacing the deleted component with a new duplicate.
3. From the unit page in Studio, you [soft] delete a component from a unit. In this case, the frontend/platform will combine two actions: soft deleting the component and removing it from the list of the unit's children. This will create a new version of the unit. You publish these changes in a single publish action, creating a `PublishLog` that affects both the unit and the deleted component.

Does that make sense?

Author: Yes, that makes a lot of sense. Should we update the ADR to reflect these specifications? It'd clear up a lot of the ambiguity you mentioned.

Thanks for updating the unit tests to illustrate this better!

Author: @bradenmacdonald: yes! I'm on it :)

Author: Done: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/pull/251/commits/901c560f661be99b13b04ac427dca60ff49f7d4e

- A single child (publishable entity) can be shared by multiple containers, allowing for reuse of content across different containers. For instance, a component can be shared by multiple units.

4. Container Versioning, Soft-Deletions and Structural Changes
==============================================================

This section defines the versioning rules for containers, explaining when a new version is created based on structural or metadata changes. It also clarifies how changes in child elements affect (or do not affect) container versions.

- A new version of a container is created only when the container itself changes, such as modifying its title, ordering of children, or adding/removing children. Changes to a child do not cascade up, meaning modifications to a child do not trigger a new version of its parent. This includes the following cases:

>   - Soft-deleting a child that is referenced by a container does not create a new version of the container. For example, soft-deleting a component used by a unit will not generate a new version of the unit. Once the deletion is published, the child will be filtered out from the container as needed to ensure consistency.

Reviewer 3: What is soft-deleting?

Reviewer: Basically deleting. But we achieve it by setting the Draft to NULL, and when published this sets the published version to NULL, but all the historic versions are there and it can be un-deleted at any time by pointing the Draft back to any version (non-NULL).

Author: I added a key concepts section with those terms to (try) reducing ambiguity:  https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/pull/251/commits/20688f13ab7adaea0fd73d5d00f5b40c43d01a6c

Reviewer: @kdmccormick We use "removal" and "deletion" for completely different things. Removal just means taking it off of some list (e.g. remove a unit from a container), but nothing is [soft] deleted.

> As a user, I remove a component from a unit within a library. This is a soft-deletion, right? Has the component also been removed from the library?

No, it's just removal, not deletion. The component continues to exist in the library and perhaps in other units.

> As a user, I remove a component from the library. 

There is no such concept as to "remove a component from the library". You may [soft] delete it however. Deleting a component is different than removing it from a unit.

Reviewer 3: > There is no such concept as to "remove a component from the library"

But, from a user's perspective, it seems like there is such a concept, and it's we're calling it soft-deletion, no?

If not, then what does a user do in order to trigger the soft-deletion of something?

Reviewer: @kdmccormick That's just called "deleting the component" (and in the code we call it "soft deletion" but that phrase is never used in the UI).

![Screenshot 2025-03-05 at 10 52 26 AM](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e14b48ad-3f67-4897-af99-52577be29786)

I just don't want to call that "removing" the component because it's doing a deletion, and in the unit context removal and deletion are very different things - the latter affects other stuff and the former only affects the unit you're removing from.

Reviewer 3: OK, I understand now, ty.

Some terminology nits for the ADR, consider these all optional: the words "removal" and "(soft-)deletion" did not mean anything different to me until you explained the difference. And "soft-deletion" kept making me think that there'd be a such thing as "hard-deletion", which there isn't, unless that's what pruning is. I would just qualify it every time: "removal from the parent container", "deletion from the library". No need to specify "soft-" since IMO it's obvious that if we can undo a deletion prior to pruning, then the deletion does not actually involve immediately wiping the data from the database--any system that supports Undo would have to work this way.

Reviewer: I agree that constantly using the term "soft deletion" is awkward. Those suggestions seem reasonable to me.

- The course hierarchy Course > Section > Subsection > Unit will be implemented as relationships between containers, with each level acting as a container that holds other content. The hierarchy will be enforced by the content restrictions of each particular container but allowed to be overridden to support `0002-content-flexibility.rst`_.
- Containers will follow extensibility principles in `0003-content-extensibility.rst`_ for creating new container types or subtypes.

3. Container Members and Relationships
=======================================

This section defines container members, their order, and relationships, covering flexible connections and support for draft and published states of their members.

- The members of a container can be any type of publishable content.
- Members within a container are maintained in a specific order as an ordered list.
- Containers represent their content hierarchy through a structure that defines parent-child relationships between the container and its members.

> - The structure defining these relationships is anonymous, so it can only be referenced through the container.

Author: note to self: this seems too implementation-specific to be part of these high level decisions.

17. Modeling Containers as a Generalized Capability for Holding Content
========================================================================

Context
-------

This ADR proposes a model for containers that can hold different types of content and can be used to model other content types with similar behavior, such as units, subsections, sections, or courses. The model defines containers' core structure and purpose, the types of containers, content constraints, container children, version control, publishing, and pruning.

Key Concepts
============

The following definitions provide context for the terms used in this ADR:

- Container: A content structure that holds other content types in a parent-child hierarchy (e.g., sections, subsections, units).
- PublishableEntity: A versioned content type that supports publishing and can exist independently or within a container (e.g., sections, units, components).
- Versioning: The process of creating new container versions when its structure or metadata changes (e.g., title, order, adding/removing children).

> - Soft-deletion: Removing a draft or published entity by setting its version to NULL, while keeping historical versions for potential reverts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Deletion: Removing a draft or published entity from the learning package. This is done by setting its version to NULL, while keeping historical versions for potential reverts.
- Removal from a container: Removing an entity from a parent container, without removing it from the learning package. 
```

- Content restrictions for containers are implemented at the app layer, allowing specific container types, like units, to limit their children to particular content types, e.g., units are restricted to contain only components.
- The course hierarchy Course > Section > Subsection > Unit will be implemented as relationships between containers, with each level acting as a container that holds other content. The hierarchy will be enforced by the content restrictions of each particular container but allowed to be overridden to support `Approach to Content Flexibility <0002-content-flexibility.rst>`_.
- Containers will follow extensibility principles in `Content Extensibility Through Model Relations <0003-content-extensibility.rst>`_ for creating new container types or subtypes.

3. Container Children and Relationships
=======================================

This section defines container children, their order, and relationships, covering flexible connections and support for draft and published states of their children.

- Each container version holds a list of children that the author has defined for that version, we will call this the entity list.

> - The entity list represents the content of a container version as defined by the author. It can be used to derive the initial versions of the container's children at the time of creation or the latest versions available at that moment.

Author: @bradenmacdonald: what do you think about this section about the new single entity list?

Reviewer: I think it's more accurate to the prototype to just say "The entity list represents the content of a container version as defined by the author, **which may be a list of specific component versions or just a list of components without version information**."

Author: Got it! Thank you

- Deletion: Removing a draft or published entity from the learning package. This is done by setting its version to NULL, while keeping historical versions for potential reverts.
- Removal from a container: Removing an entity from a parent container, without removing it from the learning package.
- Publishing: Making a container and its content available in a published state.
- Pruning: Removing unused, unpublished container versions if they are not the latest and have no references.
- Selectors: A mechanism for dynamically selecting multiple PublishableEntities based on defined criteria (e.g., split testing, randomized content selection).

Decisions
---------

1. Core Structure and Purpose of Containers
===========================================

This section defines the purpose and structure of containers, explaining how they are designed to hold various types of content through a parent-child setup.

- A container is designed as a generalized capability to hold different types of content.
- A container is a publishable content type that holds other content types through a parent-child relationship. For example, sections, subsections and units.

> - The generalized container capability will have its own Django application as part of the authoring application allowing other types of containers and content types will build on top of. For instance:

Reviewer 2: Containers were folded into the `publishing` app because of the current coupling that exists between drafts and publishing between children and parents. The alternative would have been to do everything via signals, but we decided that it wasn't worth the added complexity and potential for confusion.

Author: Updated! Thank you

  - Changes to container metadata, such as updating its title or description, will also create a new version.

5. Publishing
=============

This section explains the publishing process for containers, detailing how containers and their children become accessible, either together or independently, based on their publication state. The publishing process happens on container versions, but throughout this section we'd call them containers for simplicity.

- Containers can be published, allowing their content to be accessible from where the container is being used.
- When a draft container is published, all its draft children are also published. For instance, after publishing a draft version of subsection which contains a draft unit with an updated title, the latest published version of the unit will be the one with the updated title, reflecting the changes made previously.
- Children of a container can be published independently of the container itself. E.g., a shared component can be published independently of the unit if it also exists outside the unit.

> - Containers are not affected by the publishing process of its children. This means that publishing a component won't trigger new publishing processes for a container.

Author: @kdmccormick: what do you think about this?

> - Containers are not affected by the publishing process of its children. This means that publishing a component won't trigger new publishing processes for a container.

Reviewer 3: I think I'm confused. @ormsbee , why does publishing a child affect its parent's "last published at"? Is that just a UI-level decision we made, or is there something in the data model / python API which is bubbling the publish action up to the parent's metadata?

> - Containers are not affected by the publishing process of its children. This means that publishing a component won't trigger new publishing processes for a container.

Reviewer 3: Thanks Dave. I am curious how we will avoid confusing authors into thinking that their full container's changes are published when only a child's changes have been published. But, we don't need to resolve that for this ADR.

@mariajgrimaldi , may I suggest:
> -  Containers are not affected by the publishing process of its children. This means that publishing a component won't trigger new publishing processes for a container. However, authors will find it relevant that a container's child has changed; therefore, in the UI, publishing a child will most likely affect the date at which its ancestor containers are shown to have been "last published at".

> - Containers are not affected by the publishing process of its children. This means that publishing a component won't trigger new publishing processes for a container.

Author: Done! Thank you both for the help :)

https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/pull/251/commits/728c1e767e19acad67ca1d5a3030adae15ae0eb5

- The members of a container can be any type of publishable content. E.g., sections, subsections, units, components, and any other publishable thing. For more details on publishable content, see `PublishableEntity`_.
- Members within a container are maintained in a specific order as an ordered list. E.g., components within a unit, or units within a subsection, are presented in a specific order.
- Containers represent their content hierarchy through a structure, like Course > Section > Subsection > Unit > Component, which defines parent-child relationships at each level.
- Containers can reference a specific version of their members or be set to point to their latest versions. For instance, component V1 might be used in a unit instead of its latest version. The latest version of a member can be referenced by setting its version to ``None`` which consists of the chosen standard for this representation.
- A single member (publishable entity) can be shared by multiple containers, allowing for reuse of content across different containers. For instance, a component can be shared by multiple units.

> 4. Container Version History

Author: During discussions, container members were usually referenced as "children", so I will change all references to members to children.

- The initial list is immutable for a container version.
- The frozen list refers to the list of members at the time when the next version of the container is created.
- The author-defined list is used to show the content of a container version as the author specified it, the frozen list can be used for discard operations on a draft version and the initial-list is part of the history of evolution of the container.

Let's say a course author creates a unit version with three components, all using floating versions. Each component's latest version is V1. The author-defined list would include these three components, ordered as the author decided. The initial list would have the components pinned to V1 since that's the components' versions for this moment in time, while the frozen list would be empty until we create the next version for the unit.

Now, when the author creates a new version of the unit, for example, V2, we need to store the latest state of the container in the frozen list. This means pinning the latest versions of the components at that time, let's say V1, V2, and V3, respectively.

> Next, imagine the course author creates a another unit version but uses pinned references for the components instead of floating versions, as they don't want to use the latest updates. In this case, the author-defined list, initial list, and frozen list would all be the same, as the component versions remain fixed. If we were to use different pinned versions, then a new unit version would be created instead.

Author: According to our latest discussion had [here](https://openedx.slack.com/archives/C05NT2YN820/p1732135462177269) this must be changed to address:

1. References to defined, initial and frozen must be dropped in favor of relaxing the requirement of "container versions should not reference soft-deleted children"
2. Emphasize "only changes of the container itself generate a new version of the container," so NO external change (changes in container children) should create a new version of a container. If a container has invalid references to children, then it should be filtered out as needed.

5. Next Container Versions
==========================

This section defines the rules for version control in containers, explaining when new versions are created based on changes to container structure or metadata.

- A new version is created if and only if the container itself changes (e.g., title, ordering of members, adding or removing members) and not when its members change (e.g., a component in a Unit is updated with new text). For instance, a new version of a unit is created when a component is removed, not when a new version of a component is created.

> - When a shared member is soft-deleted in a another container, all containers referencing it should create a new version without the member. This new version will be the new draft version of the container. For example, suppose a component is shared between two units, if the component is soft-deleted independently, then we'd need to create a new version for both units sharing the component.

Author: Please, review: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/pull/251/files#r1871312529
